So welcome everyone to the Data Science Hangout and welcome back to those of you
that have joined before and I think most of you have joined here before but
welcome also to first-timers as well. So this will be a discussion on data
science leadership in the enterprise and ranging from very human oriented topics
to a little bit of technical talk as well. So just trying to hit that sweet
spot and focusing on questions that are most important to you all as well. So as
in prior weeks please feel free to speak up and ask questions or use the chat
window as well. But with that being said I'd love to introduce Elaine McVey, VP of
Data Science at the Looma Project. Elaine would you be able to help kick things
off here by sharing a bit about the work that you do on your team? Sure yeah so
the Looma Project is a small early stage startup and I've been going to smaller
companies each time I switch jobs for quite a while now and so this is the
the smallest place that I've been although we're growing quickly and so we
do storytelling via film in grocery stores and so we have tablets with like
30 seconds of human centric films essentially so this is our take on more
human oriented storytelling oriented replacement of traditional advertising
and so there's some interesting things about looking at how to understand what
components of film drive connections with consumers. So we have some film
analysis things that we look at and then also looking at time series of sales and
understanding the impact kind of causal impact of things that we're doing. So a
lot of different interesting angles and going along with being a small company
it's a small team so there's three people on the data science team
currently and so yeah so a lot of my experience has been working with
companies that are rapidly changing in smaller environments with smaller teams
which is a different set of challenges and opportunities than having a really
big established team at a larger company. I think that's something that probably
resonates with a lot of people listening in now and I know people will start
asking questions as we go so I just kind of want to kick it off with a
few questions I have but one thing we've been asking everyone every week is what
are you really excited about with data science right now? Yeah I think the one
thing that's been on my mind a lot then and I don't know that this is quite in
the core of data science but I think comes up frequently in my experience at
work and also kind of driven by what's going on in the world but I've been
thinking a lot about how we communicate and package data science work to
stakeholders or the public or whoever is relevant to in a way that kind
of balances the analytical integrity that we're responsible for with some
level of pragmatism about how humans actually make decisions for better or
worse and so I think that can take a lot of different paths but it's partly
about like really understanding where data science fits which I think varies a
lot from organization to organization and we can kind of influence a huge
range of things but generally aren't doing all of that in any given context
and then figuring out like what is the appropriate level of rigor for what
you're doing and the way that the results will be used and how do you
connect that to the decisions that will be made and have and and like what the
human factors are in making those decisions so some of the things that
I've been thinking about in that regard is whether data scientists can get
farther into the process of really taking detailed results and getting to
the what's often like kind of the packaged end result which is painfully
simpler often for the people who understand all the caveats of what goes
into it but if by doing that we can be better representatives of kind of the
integrity of the process and also have more impact by moving farther up the
communication chain as it were. Is that something that your team is starting to do?
Yeah we've thought a lot about how that plays out in different contexts so for
some things that are operational decisions then kind of a higher level of
detail and getting people to understand more detail can be important whereas
things that are more marketing or sales specific we need to understand in detail
but then also need to really be able to communicate in very simple high-level
ways and I think it takes it takes a lot of concerted effort for people who are
trained to do analysis and think about uncertainty in very precise ways and all
the different outcomes and ways to interpret things and a lot of caveats
and set that aside and think about what are the big picture takeaways that will
matter to the audience who's receiving this and how do I simplify all the
complexity without losing the core of what's actually going on and so I think
we also like just observing the world trying to deal with uncertainty through
the COVID pandemic and all that you know watching science play out in real time
in a way that is difficult for people who aren't scientists to handle with
things changing and a lot of uncertainty has really made me think about how
that applies also in a business context and whether there's a you know whether
it's better to provide results and let someone else decide how to present them
to the audience or whether it really makes sense for us to level up our
ability to do that to be more involved in in where things end up I think about
that a lot when I see things on Twitter as well if I like look at a
visualization real quick and try and figure out what did I learn from that
was I able to even answer a question there yeah and I think it often takes a
lot more effort than we wanted to to get something to the point where someone can
get the right takeaway really quickly in a way that's still connected to the data
and so part of what I've the shift that I've been making and encouraging my team
to make is that that effort is worth putting in in most cases and that we
shouldn't think of it as like our job is to get the right numbers and then all
the polish and communication and everything that's kind of like not the
right emphasis because we're focused on the analysis and really think like we
are also the best people or at least valuable people in doing that
translation and even if that takes just as much time as the analysis you can
almost not invest too much in that in terms of the impact that you have I see
a question that came in from Ian and he said he has a lot of background noise
or else he would ask live but this question was you mentioned using time
series to analyze or derive a causal link to your advertising what kinds of
models do you use for this high level is this like multivariate I'm not going to
read all the model types but I'll let you weigh in there yeah we're just
getting into the best ways to do this and I think there will be a few
different models that we're that we're landing on for different purposes and so
there's the need to both be able to forecast and to be able to understand
what's happened and it's I think we'll have different models for those two
purposes so we've just gone through a process of evaluating multiple modeling
approaches and trying to determine the right one and then are now identifying
data that we really wish we had to add in and that will probably be another
iteration as usual in terms of evaluating the the modeling approach but
some of the models that we have are considering time series specifically and
some are not and so it kind of depends on what the outcome is thank you and
again it's a then the challenges like how do you communicate that to the
stakeholders of what's going on how much do they need to know about the models
and the differences and and what are the takeaways Christian just asked a
question as well in the chat Christian if if you feel comfortable and want to
jump in and maybe just introduce yourself and feel free to ask that as
well sure can you all hear me hi so I'm Christian I'm waving but my
cameras not on so um but I'm waving I'm the data science manager here at cosmic
pets we are basically a pet hard goods wholesaler but of course we work fairly
closely with a lot of our retail partners one of the so one of the things
that I'm really responsible for here is like forecasting making sure we have
enough inventory and obviously over the last 18 months that's been an exceedingly
difficult challenge with how kovat is really affecting like everything and now
even I mean obviously when it was here like sales were crazy for some things
and really really crazy for others but even now that things are starting to
level out it's like a lot of our models for seeing like for the last year like
everything every all the patterns that were normally there in our data are just
different are you guys seeing that are you running into that how are you kind
of working with that yeah I am by no means an expert on time series or
forecasting but my initial thought and looking at data a few months into kovat
is just like every model everywhere is now going to be broken for a long time
because there's just so many impacts and this kind of time so we definitely saw
you know there were major impacts on grocery purchasing that kind of spiked
and then have gradually leveled off and declined somewhat but are still above
previous levels and then also a lot of changes in how people purchase things
and you know also like people looking at how much of that curbside pickup and
online ordering is going to stay versus people reverting back to going in-store
so certainly has accelerated a lot of behavioral changes in terms of data this
is one of the reasons that some of our modeling approaches aren't time series
based and are stead instead comparing things in different ways so we have some
things that we can compare to like other things in our in the categories that
we're in so categories are you know like wine dairy things like that and grocery
for people who don't live in this world and so we're able to look at the overall
trends and compare the impact of what we're doing to those in a way that isn't
explicitly dependent on modeling history but even before the pandemic it
was hard to forecast for a lot of specific products what to expect because
of a lot of new products and and seasonal changes that affect them
differently and there's a lot going on so it's a challenging problem to begin
with and then COVID changed everything so yeah it will get easier now that
we're getting into some historical data that's been all in the COVID period but
obviously there are still effects and I imagine there's no perfect solution
except to think about various ways to where we have the advantage of being
able to compare things in a way that if you're trying to forecast a very
specific thing then you've got a harder problem
just that looking through the chat looks like Matias you may have something to
add on to that as well yeah no I was just completely agreeing with Elaine
what you just said we were trying to build a marketing mixed model here
internally for one of our brands and we absolutely did have that problem of now
all of a sudden we have COVID affected data in our test set so it's hard to
actually verify how good a model is now because all of those time series are
just messed up yeah I think it's a good opportunity to be creative and thinking
about other ways to tackle the task at hand but if you have a very specific
forecast I need that painful situation I don't know if anyone else who has more
expertise in this area has good suggestions it looks like you're adding
something there in the chat as well yes find could do the magic like if you like
for example like down employment that went up really fast if you add spline
and then make assumption about the decay you know this is a point that you don't
know where it's going to land off so we can do different decay rates and
suggested like a what-if we're going to the fast recovery slow recovery and then
use it to future similar event like it's like if you know first wave we had the
first first wave and then like we're going to have like a second wave how
it's going to look like so I found it is something really useful
yes yeah prepare for a range of possibilities instead of trying to
really pinpoint what to expect is a better approach yeah I played around
briefly just trying to add like some indicator variables for like different
phases of kovat and trying to get that in there but are in a lot of cases our
data isn't necessarily dense enough anyway so it's like just trying to parse
that out between what's actually coveted and what's true seasonality can also just
be a challenge yeah I imagine there's a lot of interactions that are hard to
predict also like for pets I know tons of people got new pets during the
pandemic and so you just correct for kind of the overall level of demand the
things that people need might be different if there's you know more new
pet owners and more puppies and yeah and people are really more engaged with
their pets too so we saw things just like um like collars or leashes or
harder goods that like dogs like pets won't chew up will spike like had like
one spike and then they more or less kind of like came down to normal maybe
it's partly because of new pets but then other things that like toys that they
would like destroy would have like more and it's more of a sustained increase
there's there's all kinds of stuff in there yeah so that's all fascinating
unless your job is to predict what's about to happen it's so fascinating it's
just I'm balding at a much faster rate than I was pre-kovat only and I see that
Eric asked a question around one of your previous points Eric do you want to
weigh in and ask that live yeah sure can you all hear me yeah all right cool so
Elaine it's great to have you talk to us again I know we've had some great
conversations of past our studio conferences but I know for every
organization can treat this kind of differently but I don't know if you had
any tips on you know maybe setting up data scientists to be more involved in
key decisions that are made and like an organization level at least in my
industry that's becoming more and more common now especially with the type of
data we deal with I don't know if you had general tips for those that kind of
want to have a seat at the table so to speak and those in those key decisions
yeah I think you know some of that is like organizational where data science
sits in the organization and and how high level representation you have but
in terms of what's easier to control for most data scientists I think it is the
best approach is to learn a lot about the business and understand how to
communicate with your audience and do more of the translation of not like this
is what I this is what I did to get to this result and these are all the things
you need to understand about it from a data perspective but to say like this is
what this means for you and you know like the more we can present things in a
way that fits with how people are ready to receive things I think that's part of
building that credibility and and people feeling like the data scientist isn't
this you know brilliant magical expert who sits in the corner and and then
other people have to take what they do and figure out what to change but that
we're like constructive parts of the business and decision-making
conversation and we can kind of keep all the critical details about what we have
to do to get there out of the way and except when we're talking to our teams
about the work but that's hard you know even if it's something that you can do
well it's hard to do in any given situation where you just come out of
you know putting all this work into a project and like extract the details out
of your head when you're talking about it I see that Don asked a question and
was wondering Don if you could provide some context or background with regards
to some of the work that you do yes yes sure can you hear me okay yeah hi yeah
my name is Don bunk I'm a data scientist at X's digital which is a digital
analytics company in Burlington Vermont I was just curious because our fields
have some overlap Elaine I was wondering I can imagine there's a lot of
confounding factors in your field and you're trying to analyze your data and I
was just wondering if your company is able to make use of a B testing at all
or you know but by any you know by whatever you want to call it a B tester
and testing in general and or I was wondering if just by you know the virtue
of your clients if you're limited to lack of a better term like retrospective
analysis and as a follow-up question if you're not doing that I was wondering if
your clients are actually interested in doing things like that or if you feel
like you have pushback about things like this because it requires like a scale up
initially you know to where it's the retrospective testing they people just
dump the data on your desk and say here you go figure it out but a B testing
requires data scientists to kind of have a seat at the table up front as well to
organize the test so I was just wondering if you're making use of this
or if you just feel like there's pushback about stuff like this from your
clients yeah that's a really interesting question so we're trying to do both both
do experiments that are designed in a way to let us do better cleaner analysis
and analyze the data that we have despite confounding factors and so
there's a lot of different ways to approach experimentation so sometimes we
can compare sales to control stores and things and that can be helpful but
doesn't really scale in our case to our standard campaign so it's more of an
exception to do some pilot experiments and once we've fully rolled out then
there's a really interesting challenge there where people do want to do
experiments both within the company people are interested in doing
experiments and we have clients who are interested in testing things but there's
a lot of thought to put into how to do them and some of the factors are
figuring out how to do experiments that don't have a huge additional burden of
work so for things that you know things like films that are a lot of work to
create and aren't just digitally generated and where we have you know a
limited number of places that we can test different things then there's
thinking about like how do we do this within the context of how the business
operates in a way that makes use of things that we're already doing or that
adds you know an amount of work that's acceptable so that's one thing and
that's where being at a small company it's much easier to understand all the
different pieces of the company and how they work together and how you know this
great experiment that you're thinking of in isolation how that plays out in
reality for all the other teams who would have to be involved and also just
a lot easier to have those conversations because we all know and understand each
other in terms of our roles the other interesting thing is that you know if
you're trying to measure the impact on sales you almost by definition have to
sacrifice some sales in order to do an experiment so to detect an effect will
there have to be something that we think will impact sales and then the question
is well do we know how much and how much is too much for something that we're
running where you know we're trying to run something that's effective and so we
don't want to intentionally make part of the campaign less effective just to
measure it if we can avoid it so we have right now an approach where we are
trying to generate hypotheses from historical data knowing that there are
some confounding factors that can't entirely be separated out and then also
think about how we test some of those hypotheses with experimentation and being
creative about the ways that we can do that and so we have multiple
possibilities that that we're thinking about and we do some experiments
currently but but would like to build that in as a more regular piece of what
we're doing cool thank you very much for the info I appreciate it
could I add a question on to that how do you ensure that experiments are taken
all the way through right so a challenge of mine is set up a bunch of experiments
and then some drop by the wayside yeah yeah so so I guess if you have a series
of experiments that you kind of need to work through to get an answer then that
then that follow-through can be a problem we have fairly discrete time
periods that we work with and so we can plan an experiment for a particular time
period and customer set of stores and run that and and analyze the results and
it has to be set up in advance in a way that kind of requires buy-in from
everyone so we haven't had that problem but I think just generally getting
people on board with with experimentation as a valuable and and
feasible thing to do is probably a an ongoing challenge in a lot of places but
I think when it when it works out well and you can say we think this is what's
going on and now we can do a much simpler kind of head-to-head comparison
then it's easier for people to understand the results and think through
it themselves and not have this complex model in the background that's that's a
bit mysterious so I think when it works it can build a lot of credibility with
what you're learning but yeah figuring out how to do experiments without making
everything really complex and hard on people is definitely part of the
challenge. When you say fall by the wayside like what do you actually mean
like why Robert like why do your tests like can you elaborate on that? Sure so
full disclosure I'm not a data scientist but we do some degree of testing on our
marketing team and when I say fall by the wayside right so I'm I don't always
have an experiment plan like so I'll have I'll have a way to measure two
things set an A B test live set a few live and then one sort of you know
catches my interest more than all the others and it is sort of stop paying
attention to the test right so the failure I guess is not having a clear
objective and then not having a clear time frame and then I blame my teammates
for not holding me accountable. I would too. So I think so we have a testing a
whole testing experimentation team where I work and I know they take like the
roadmap very seriously so any test gets scored in a way that they try to
understand the effort of that the impact and all of those things so maybe some of
that would help if you had like all of your testing ideas and you would kind of
put them in a list of priorities of you know how much business impact did they
have you know is it gonna require a lot of deaf time to set that up what's the
actual you know impact versus the you know ease of rolling this out and then
kind of just focusing on your top ones that might just naturally help you you
know prioritizing the ones that you feel like are gonna actually move the needle.
Do you know how that team prioritizes experiments like do they are they just
kind of taking requests from stakeholders or do they have a really
clear mandate? Yeah so I sit in like the marketing team so I lead a marketing
analytics team and that team also sits inside of marketing so most of the
projects that we are getting are on the acquisition marketing end but we do try
to like democratize the in the sort of incoming ideas so if you if your
function lives completely outside of marketing that doesn't mean that we
wouldn't like not take those tests and then there are several frameworks that
you can do to actually prioritize tests we internally use like the there's like
this rice model so like reach impact effort to kind of like just try to kind
of get an idea of like you know what the business impact would be for a
project yeah and then it essentially gets built and put in production.
Interesting it's interesting that there's a whole team devoted to that one
of one of the things kind of related to testing that's higher level that I've
seen be effective and just kind of how people think is just trying to get
people to articulate their hypotheses and that doesn't have to be necessarily
things that are easily measurable with data in the traditional sense but just
like what do we think is going on with our industry and where we play in it and
and how our customers operate and things like that and then just writing those
down and revisiting them I think helps people think about what are we learning
and when do we change this kind of hypothetical knowledge that we have
based on new information whether it's data specifically or you know the
preponderance of the experience of the sales team or whatever it is and that
seems like a little bit more lightweight way to get everybody on board with
thinking that way and then obviously there are some things where data and
structured experiments are important to answering those questions but even just
the structured thinking I think is helpful and staying on top of things.
This may shift gears a little bit here but there's a question from David related
more to training and David would you be able to introduce yourself and add some
context to that question as well? Yeah I'll be happy to so my name is David
Dreyer I'm a technical expert in product safety and data science at Sootinja
Crop Protection and you know the question here is within our company
there's this global effort to increase digital fluency and several folks on our
team in product safety are looking to upskill in data science specifically in
R. I've been asked to coordinate a series of training sessions so I'm
curious if others in those calls have had a similar experience in their
company if they have any suggestions you know things that have worked things that
haven't worked this just came across my desk yesterday so I just thought I'd
ask the crowd and learn more about others experiences here. To add to that
I'd be interested in anyone's experience with supporting people in learning R or
or other programming languages versus encouraging people to learn SQL first.
Rami do you have anything to add there or would you be able to provide some
perspective? This is where we failed so I probably should not give advice on
this like we have a team on finance today using Excel and we got to the
point that we all recognize that they probably should start use R more but we
did not find the time or the method to really do this so I'm looking to hear.
Hi everybody I just want to step in my experience was okay I should introduce
myself as well I'm Steve Charlesworth I'm a data scientist at Cook Medical we
make medical devices. I've had a similar experience we have a lot of people
researchers using Excel and you know I've kind of taken it actually upon
myself to introduce people to R and try to you know assist them to the degree I
can to get up to speed and we've definitely had success stories where the
you know the people are motivated and pretty sharp to begin with you know you
have some good luck there but I feel like to really make that happen you
maybe really need like some management blessing and a little more structure and
formality around it maybe you know get people sent to training so that they get
you know the message you know not only that R is cool and that you could do a
lot of great wonderful things with it but that you know it's also something
that you know is expected as part of your toolkit going ahead so that's just
my thoughts. I think it comes down to like showing the value of something to
someone too right like I think like these top-down trainings just like rarely
work right the way like okay everyone's gonna learn Python now everyone
everyone's gonna learn SQL now whatever but like if you can show them that you
know hey you're doing this Excel based process that's taking you like a day to
update this Excel sheet you can run this function in an R and
actually understand what's going on I think that's the only way to really show
or really get people to adopt it because otherwise it's gonna be even after like
you can do a month-long training on R and then like if you ask people six
months from now you know I don't know how many of them are actually gonna
transition into that into that process even though you've given them the
business training like really like the only way to get people to actually adopt
it is to have them know work with stuff that they already do so like have them
actually do a project that they're currently working on and use R with it
and you kind of like make them understand themselves that they by using
this process can actually help help themselves a little bit better I'll agree
with Elaine though I would go with SQL first and R I think that's a you kind of
like have to have that as a foundation first rather than you know jumping right
in that first we did I would yeah just put in my vote for SQL before R too as
they say SQL is intergalactic data speak so you got to know it so I guess I'll
wait here I've so I've tried this at two different companies and I've had two
different results my previous company I tried one I didn't try so much as I was
asked to host like a couple of just training sessions just show people hey
here's how you do stuff here's how you assign variables and it was like a room
of like 10 or 12 people in there and we did it maybe twice and I don't know that
anybody got anything out of it right they were all Excel users just you can't
go like and expect it to be quick and easy and painless because it's not going
to be what I've actually started now here at my current company is basically
like a fruit forest scorched earth like they're going to learn but more of like
so I have actually scheduled with my team and I would take advantage of the
fact I have a small three-peat team where there's just three people under me
call it Friday fund days we just pick a project and we the first few I I coded I
would just read here's how you read in data we're gonna go through we're gonna
work this project beginning to end and I did the first one and after a few
sessions that way I started going around and we all took we would all take turns
it's it's your day coding now it's your day coding now it's your day coding and
that's actually worked to some extent like people are more comfortable once
you you can't just leave it there though because if they aren't practicing on
their own as well those skills will still atrophy so I've said you know at
times so this team is more definitely data-centered I don't know if you guys
are familiar with alter X it's a codeless you know kind of analytics
platform so they've had some experience working with data like that but maybe
not necessarily code based environment so then I just said you know at times
guys I don't expect you to pick it up like I know you can do some of this
first project the first five projects I know you can do quicker and all tricks
but I want you to do it in our to learn and that has helped but it is not easy
there's no anybody saying we're just gonna teach them and they're gonna learn
and it's great and it's just gonna happen needs to realize that's it's not
how it works my experience has been that even pretty motivated people if they
aren't actually using our for like half the time in a given week it's just that
it can't get to the point where they can get past the initial problems and really
make progress and there was one time at a previous company where we had a couple
people who were making a really concerted effort to get more into the
bioinformatics side switching over from being dedicated lab biologists and they
were like to somebody's point about managerial support they were like split
time between the two teams as a training exercise for like a year so they were
actually immersed in you know doing things with side side by side with
people who've been doing it for years and that seemed to work really
effectively but other than that I've had a lot of people who've been really
interested in learning are but they just haven't been able to work it into their
day-to-day jobs and they can't find enough extra time to really get their
sequel might be a little bit easier in that regard I'll say I'm definitely not
an expert on this but um I feel like this question does come up quite a bit
at a bunch of different industry meetups or the Boston use our group that I run
and I think it kind of goes back to a lot of what people have touched upon as
well but really like or tips that people share is really just go and produce
something so find something that it's taking them a really long time to do as
you mentioned the tears in Excel and how could they go about making that more
reproducible and starting to like see the value in using are right from the
beginning like for me personally like that's something that I've I've been
trying to do in my own role so even whether in sales or marketing for
example like after a webinar I would have this like sheet of all the
questions that people ask and then trying to figure out how do I just put
this into an R markdown document that I could easily share with people and it
was a little more painful in the beginning of figuring out how to do it
but now that I have it set up I can just do that after every session and it takes
like one minute or so so maybe helping them like find those areas where they
could make things easier for themselves so yeah and just one other thought there
and I'll turn it over to someone else but I think it'd also be helpful to
maybe try and find others on your team that could help you in in getting other
people on board too like there are probably other R users at your company
even if they're not on the data science team but maybe even in like human
resources or supply chain or and they're reaching out to those people and maybe
like having a buddy with helping you teach people might be really helpful too
yes I would like to add something so hi my name is Cristal I work as data
analyst I am from Costa Rica so I want to share a little bit about my experience
on this and I think as Christian mentioned at my work there some of my
team are working with Alteryx so it's like a drag-and-drop tool so it seems
like more easy and they think that it's more easy because you're not coding
because once you show something that has some code they just like think that it's
really difficult and they do not have the time to spend on learning but what
I find useful is maybe if my team would like to use that then is to show the
importance of using R or other tools that might be more useful and what I
try to do is like with the stakeholders or internal clients every time that I
they run a report and then for example they build a report that they have been
working on two years there it is like their baby so they don't want you to
touch that baby that they have built in Excel and you have to automate that task
so what I find useful is to work side by side with them to explain what you are
doing to show so they for example yesterday I have this experience in
which she just get lost in all of the tabs that she has in Excel so I mentioned
her like see you think like if we can automate this in what I am doing then
you don't have to suffer to try to find on all the tabs of Excel what you are
built so to show the benefits of using R for example I think that's like to make
conscious on also the stakeholders and internal clients so then I can share
that success stories to my team and then they will find that useful and then we
they will try the same to other stakeholders that they have so I really
think that it's not so easy like to make that transition in Excel or Alteryx
and using our Python but I think that a clue of doing this is to show the
success stories and also I think it should be that commitment of the
managers and they have they need to have this vision of this is important so we
can transfer this knowledge to all of the team.
So if anyone else has any, thank you very much Crystal as well, if anyone else has
anything to add to that feel free to add more into the chat too but one question
that I'd like to direct at you Elaine is how do you communicate the value of data
science to executives or for people that are just trying to build out a data
science team within their company? Yeah I think if you are the first data
scientist or working on building that early team there's some questions to ask
which hopefully you have insight into although not always about why you were
hired in the first place and so especially if it's a small company
somebody is making a big investment in hiring a data scientist and it's good to
understand what the thinking was behind that which is not always entirely
logical well-informed thinking it can be just like well we have data and data is
really valuable and so we need a data scientist and that is challenging coming
in but then does you know give you the opportunity to kind of clarify where
data science can be helpful and educate people and it's good to know that that's
what you're stepping into and then I think there are other cases where
there's a particular need that data scientists or analysts are being hired
for and that's good to know also so I think regardless of it's good to
understand that like why are you here or why do people think you're here and
then how do you work with that beginning context and then also look at the
business and where there's value to be provided in data and helping executives
kind of understand where it makes the most sense for you to focus which may or
may not be what they imagined initially but I think so so I think it depends
somewhat on on the business and the leadership and the kind of the nature of
the organizational buy-in that you have and you have to think about that context
but more broadly I think if there's something that carries over to most
places in terms of data science though it's about making sure that you're
making well-informed investments and so if you're investing in product
development teams or you're investing in acquiring certain data or in you know
optimizing things with your customers pretty much anything it's valuable to
know how much impact is that having and what things did we invest in that we're
not really getting a good return on and how do we you know reconfigure our focus
to the things that are that are providing the most return and so I think
that's the kind of framing that fits best with the way that executives are
thinking about the business and where data has a legitimate role to play and
then how to translate that into what you work on and how quickly you can
provide results that let them make those kinds of decisions because sometimes
you're walking into a situation where there's been no you know real data
infrastructure or collection efforts and so it's it's hard to get things up and
running but I think like that that kind of framing that fits with business
leadership is the best way to to start in terms of connecting to executives how
much do you push back and then how do you get comfortable with pushing back or
positioning yourself as an expert to the rest of the business that like you know
best on what what should be prioritized in in data in data science projects yeah
I don't think I would say it that way because it's true for one right I think
it's a it's a collaboration of hearing from people in the business what's what's
most useful for them and going back and forth between where we the data experts
both can provide value based on you know the data that's available and where
we think there's the most value to be found based on you know what we think is
possible with the data and aligning that with the problems people have and I
think the more you can get to the kind of underlying problems they're trying to
solve and get past just the straight up you know tell me send me this data set or
tell me how this compares to this the better off you are and so the kind of
product management approach of asking why and getting down to like a user
story type level where someone's saying on I need to do this because I'm trying
to accomplish this allows you some leeway to say okay well now you know I
understand your problems and now let me help figure out how data can best
address those but it's easy for us to see data problems and data solutions to
things and that may not align with the most critical priorities of the business
so there's like an ongoing effort that you have to make to understand what's
going on with the people you're trying to provide value to and especially
rapidly evolving companies that's constantly changing so it's a
non-trivial task to keep up. Mike I see you have your hand raised there sorry if
I missed it from before. No no that's okay I just had a lot of thoughts on
this topic of communicating to leadership what data science can and
can't do I think you know especially once you get to the point of having a
data science organization I think a lot of data science scientists will tell you
that instead of you know modelers or analytics people there were problem
solvers that kind of our core and I think that that's that's really the way
that we need to sell data science to the c-suite is that we're a function for
solving problems. I remember I used to see this this stupid analytics pyramid
that was like we're gonna start out with descriptive analytics and then we're
gonna go to predictive analytics and then we're gonna do machine learning and
then we're gonna do AI at the top once we get to like our most mature point in
our organization and I just don't think that that communicates what data science
is very well to non-technical folks at all I don't think I think a particular
problem is suited for a particular solution and I think that half of the
time the c-suite is just looking for something to be automated which isn't a
data problem at all and I think you need to have somebody who understands I think
going back to what Elaine says you know that translational component of come to
me with your problem that your business problem and I'm gonna tell you if it's a
data problem or if it's not a data problem at all and how data science you
know can or can't be used to solve it it is a report the best output in terms of
the solution that we're going to deliver to you or do we need to build you a
model and put that in an API that fits into our current business process so
that somebody's not you know running a model on their own laptop so I think it
really comes down to problem-solving at a high level and I think that a lot of
the sales and marketing material that's that's been out there for a while
doesn't do us justice as the data scientists who are on the ground trying
to communicate and trying to help the business move forward and solve its
problems if you wouldn't mind introducing yourself I think it'd be
helpful to maybe share your your company to well sure you don't want me
to just rant the whole time yeah my name is Michael Thomas I'm the chief data
scientist at Ketchbrook analytics which were a data science consulting firm out
of the Hartford Connecticut area really focusing on that whole end-to-end data
science lifecycle in terms of getting the problem the business problem
translating it into a data problem and then actually deploying the solution
kind of from end to end and we highly specialize in our I'm a certified R
studio and shiny instructor so live breathe are when I can it it does seem
like a lot of the topics end up going back to communication and Elena I was
just curious like what are specific things that you think data scientists
can do today or like things that you maybe taught to people on your team to
really get better at communicating data science one of the things I know I've
told people on my team repeatedly over time and also try and tell myself is to
go through the process of trying to look at what you're doing from your audiences
or stakeholders perspective three times which may not even be enough and try and
like strip away the data scientist specific piece of it and get it closer
and closer to you know someone who's arriving at this meeting and is going to
pay attention for maybe 15 minutes and has problems they want to solve what do
they want to hear about how can they consume that and what do they not want
to hear about and so that process of like do that three times like present to
other people on your team present to other people in the company and get
feedback it's it's really hard to get in just one step of I did this and now I'm
going to try and present it to that the right level of communication simplicity
and audience awareness so that's one thing and then I think just getting
exposure exposure to other teams and other parts of the business wherever
possible really helps build empathy and understanding for other people's
perspectives so whether that's like getting out into the field or sitting in
on other teams discussions just generally trying to understand where
everyone else is coming from and what kinds of pressures and challenges
they're dealing with is really helpful not just for not just for formulating
what problems we solve and having kind of contextual awareness of building
models and things but in communicating with people also feels like an hour just
went by really quickly so we're gonna we'll stay on if if people don't have to
run to other meetings but just wanted to make sure I didn't miss any questions
Rob and Rob for monitoring the chat but one other question I think has I'm
trying to ask everybody in each week is what advice would you have for someone
who's looking to get into a data science leadership position and I think this is
something we did touch upon in in the webinar I think Italy yeah I think
expanding your the time you spend and the emphasis you put on things other
than the data work to understanding the business better understanding what
executives care about and what their perspective is getting lots of practice
everywhere you can communicating to different groups and then also like how
you kind of think about not just prioritizing things within your team but
communicating those priorities effectively and so depending on your
position you may just be kind of observing other people do these things
but there's often opportunities to jump in and maybe even take over tasks that
your current leader doesn't want to do like you know updating roadmaps and
and communicating where things stand and stuff that's good practice and and just
kind of getting a lot of feedback on how people interpret things and what people
care about and and how to how to do that kind of thing but there's also almost
always opportunities to just you know go find people who work in other parts of
the company and sit down and hear what they're working on and and get that
broader perspective that's not data-specific because a lot of the
leadership stuff is not so much about data as it is about how you interact
with everyone else I see the comment about money is what matters when it
comes to executives I really do think understanding executives is a
fascinating undertaking like just thinking about preparing graphs that
executives are going to present or consume I once told someone on my team
long ago like he actually wrote a function called executify and like
basically this needs to take the graphs we have and make it look like they were
drawn with a crayon like simple big you know and and that's the kind of thing
that often gets in the executive level communications and then the question is
why because sometimes it seems like it gets dumbed down the higher it goes but
executives are generally very sharp people many of whom have come from very
detailed technical backgrounds right so it's not about the people it's about the
responsibilities they have and the perspective they have and I think really
trying to understand that is really helpful in thinking about how to
support them in running the business and they do care about money which can be
frustrating but is also really important if you want to stay employed and work
for a company that has money to spend on data scientists and stays in business so
it's somebody has to care about that and we have to support them in some way in
doing their jobs so I know we are getting to the end of the time here so
anyone has to drop no worries but I'd love to keep this conversation going if
if people are able to and it sounds like I know in the middle of the talk today
we were talking a bit about how do you get other people on board internally or
people that are using Excel and maybe wanting to switch to R and it it felt
like that was something we should maybe chat about more are there other topics
or other things that people would like to discuss I'd love to know what you
look for when hiring Elaine so because I'm usually hiring onto small teams at
small companies and teams that I don't expect to grow to be 20 people in the
next year or two I tend to look for people who are generalists to a certain
degree and so I think about like the the whole spectrum from like data
engineering all the way to maybe data visualization or whatever is the kind of
last stage of communicating things and all the pieces in between which is you
know analytics engineering and and modeling and analysis and all of that
and and look for people who have a strength in some area that we don't yet
have but can flex to cover almost everything else with some level of
competence because it's so hard to predict exactly what we need and it
tends to fluctuate over time because we're kind of covering whatever the
company needs that fits in our area and then the other thing is communication as
you can probably guess from everything I've said to this point so we actually
have an exercise people do where they do a little analysis and then prepare a
slide and that's pretty key I don't know if you could think off the top of your
head but what are some things that folks get wrong when they are communicating
insights either in your hiring test or actually on the job I think the most
common is to talk way too much about the things that are really important for how
you did the work and not enough about the result so like this is the type of
model we used these are the assumptions you need to cover some of that at least
be able to answer questions but mostly nobody cares just don't I mean people
within your team should care and you should care but that's our responsibility
to care about nobody else really wants to know most of the time
on that topic of hiring and I know last week I think it was we were talking a
bit about when like how to stand out to to hiring managers when there's so much
like NLP behind resumes and what can people do to get around that yeah I may
not be the best person to answer that because smaller companies tend to be a
little bit more hands-on but maybe that explains some of the resumes that I see
that have lists of 10,000 technologies if they're trying to work with algorithms
I often find that people stand out pretty easily so it's quite likely
nobody will read your cover letter but you should still write one well and just
having your resume be you know formatted typo-free targeted stands out a lot
instead of the list of like I can do all these things although that that may
be effective in other contexts but it's not in the context I remember Kobe
mentioned that on the webinar like you'd get resumes with just like a bunch of
different technologies listed yeah maybe it's like an SEO strategy almost maybe
like I need to communicate this thing but then I also need to tag it with 10,000
things that some algorithm might be looking for yeah I see Steve said one
resume for people one for machines I guess I don't see any other questions
I'm trying to scroll through and double-check but just want to say thank
you so much Elaine for all the insights and opening up to the group also just
want to ask if people have other questions for you what's the best way to
get in touch with you probably Twitter for people who use Twitter I keep up
with that much better than LinkedIn and so it's EA McVeigh on Twitter perfect
well thank you so much have a great rest of the day everyone
everybody
you